Add first part of advanced tutorial (#512)
alpaka-group/alpaka3: docs/source/tutorial/multidim.rst

Working With Multidimensional Kernels
=====================================

Many important beginner examples in parallel computing are naturally multidimensional:
images, matrices, heat diffusion, cellular automata, and finite-difference stencils.
For those problems, it is usually clearer to keep the kernel multidimensional instead of flattening everything into one linear index.

Choose the Kernel Shape From the Data
-------------------------------------

> If the data is naturally a matrix or image, use two-dimensional extents and two-dimensional frames.

Reviewer: Need a link to the definition of a frame here

This avoids hand-written index decoding and makes boundary conditions easier to read.

  .. literalinclude:: ../../snippets/example/080_multidim.cpp
    :language: cpp
    :start-after: BEGIN-TUTORIAL-multidimFrameSpec
    :end-before: END-TUTORIAL-multidimFrameSpec
    :dedent:

The frame shape should follow the logical shape of the work:

- 1D frames for flat vectors and simple reductions.
- 2D frames for images, matrices, and most stencil codes.
- 3D frames only when the algorithm is truly volumetric.
- ND frames for algorithms that have more than three natural dimensions, such as high-dimensional grids.

Keep in mind that the rightmost index, usually ``x``, is the fastest varying dimension in *alpaka* buffers.

> This is important if you are using hand written ``for``-loops to iterate over the data instead of ``makeIdxMap``.

Reviewer: Needs a link to `makeIdxMap` reference

Author: This would require Breathe, which is not included in the docs at the moment. Else I can not link directly to the doxygen of `makeIdxMap`

A Small 2D Stencil Example
--------------------------

The following kernel performs one five-point average step on a small 2D grid.
This is a common teaching example because it introduces three important ideas at once:

- Iterating over multidimensional buffers.
- Handling boundaries explicitly.
- Reading neighboring cells by using relative offsets.

  .. literalinclude:: ../../snippets/example/080_multidim.cpp
    :language: cpp
    :start-after: BEGIN-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelStructure
    :end-before: END-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelStructure
    :dedent:

> The structure is still the same as in the one-dimensional tutorial:

Reviewer: Add link to 1D tutorial

Author: Currently, it is not possible the basic kernel tutorial is currently not merged

If you want to optimize the boundary handling later, you can write a separate kernel for the border and launch it with a different frame shape that only covers the halo/guard region.

Launching the 2D Kernel
-----------------------

The host-side launch is unchanged except that the problem extents are vectors now, and the chosen ``FrameSpec`` is
2-dimensional as well.

  .. literalinclude:: ../../snippets/example/080_multidim.cpp
    :language: cpp
    :start-after: BEGIN-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelLaunch
    :end-before: END-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelLaunch
    :dedent:

What Users Usually Need To Know Early
-------------------------------------

The following habits are worth learning from the start:

- Keep boundary handling explicit. A branch for the border is in the first implementation fine.
- Iterate over the full valid problem range, not over guessed thread ids.
- Use multidimensional buffers when the algorithm has multidimensional neighbors.
- Keep reads and writes easy to see. You make fewer mistakes when each output element is written once.

> - Start with a clear kernel and a small test case before trying to optimize shared memory use or tuning the ``FrameSpec``

Reviewer: This section seems like guidelines for the users who are starting out with alpaka in general. Maybe we should move this somewhere else.

Author: Most points point exactly to the example behaviours e.g. boundary handling.
Some notes are more generic, like use multi-dimensional data and addressing if you data is n-dimensional. Thats are typical points users do wrong, most kernels e.g., in scintific code used flat 1d data and maps it to n-dimensional, that bad for performance.

When to Use Manual Thread and Block Indices
-------------------------------------------

There are cases where explicit thread or block indices are useful, for example:

- Implementing a very specific CPU/GPU mapping.
- Using an algorithm that must reason about exact block-local cooperation.
- Porting low-level CUDA/HIP code step by step.

That is not the best starting point for most kernels.
For portable code, prefer ``FrameSpec`` plus ``makeIdxMap``.

> Once the algorithm is correct and tested, you can move to more specialized mappings if profiling shows that you need them.

Reviewer: Maybe this section also needs to move. Maybe to `kernelParallelism`

Author: merged it into `Practical Advice`

Working With Multidimensional Kernels
=====================================

> Many important beginner examples in parallel computing are naturally multidimensional:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many important examples in parallel computing are naturally multidimensional:
```

images, matrices, heat diffusion, cellular automata, and finite-difference stencils.

> For these kinds of problems, it is usually clearer to keep the kernel multidimensional instead of flattening everything into one linear index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*alpaka* supports multi-dimensional kernels and memory.
That's why it's usually better to implement these types of problems using multiple dimensions rather than flattening everything into a single linear index.
```

Choose the Kernel Shape From the Data
-------------------------------------

If the data is naturally a matrix or image, it is convenient to use two-dimensional extents and :ref:`frames <frame>`.
This avoids hand-written index decoding and makes boundary conditions easier to read.

  .. literalinclude:: ../../snippets/example/080_multidim.cpp
    :language: cpp
    :start-after: BEGIN-TUTORIAL-multidimFrameSpec
    :end-before: END-TUTORIAL-multidimFrameSpec
    :dedent:

> We recommend that the frame shape should follow the logical shape of the work:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend that the frame shape should follow the logical shape of the work. Typical use cases for different dimensions are:
```

- 1D frames for flat vectors and simple reductions.
- 2D frames for images, matrices, and most stencil codes.

> - 3D frames only when the algorithm is truly volumetric.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 3D frames for volumetric problems, such as the position of particles in a space.
```

> - ND frames for algorithms that have more than three natural dimensions, such as high-dimensional grids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ND frames for algorithms that have more than three natural dimensions, such as position coordinate plus a time stamp.
```

Keep in mind that the rightmost index, usually ``x``, is the fastest varying dimension in *alpaka* buffers.
This is important if you are using hand written ``for``-loops to iterate over the data instead of ``makeIdxMap``.

A Small 2D Stencil Example
--------------------------

> The following kernel performs one five-point average step on a small 2D grid.

Reviewer 2: Please describe a little more, what the algorithm should do. It is hard to understand.

If I'm not wrong, you have a 2D grid and you select an element with the coordinate (y,x). You take the values (y-1, x),  (y+1, x), (y, x+1), (y, x-1) and add it to the value of position (y,x). Than divide it by 5 to get the average of all values.

This introduces three important ideas at once:

- Iterating over multidimensional buffers.
- Handling boundaries explicitly.
- Reading neighboring cells by using relative offsets.

  .. literalinclude:: ../../snippets/example/080_multidim.cpp
    :language: cpp
    :start-after: BEGIN-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelStructure
    :end-before: END-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelStructure
    :dedent:

The structure is still the same as in the one-dimensional tutorial:

- Ask the output buffer for its extents.
- Build ``IdxRange{extents}`` to describe the full valid multidimensional index domain.
- Map worker threads via ``makeIdxMap`` to the range.
- Guard the boundary cells, to avoid out-of-bounds accesses.

> - Update neighbor locations by adding or subtracting direction vectors from the current ``Vec`` index.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence is wrong. Normally you update only our own position and not neighbors.

This is the natural alpaka style for stencil code.
The project examples, such as the heat-equation stencil, operate on the multidimensional index directly and move to
neighbors with vector offsets instead of splitting ``x`` and ``y`` into separate scalars and rebuilding indices.

> Handling the boundaries within the kernel which performs computation on the inner region of the domain is not good for performance, but it is the easiest and best way to start writing a correct kernel.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the sentence. Most of the time, boundary checks are required to process real world problem. 

Maybe you mean something like processing a vector with SIMD commands. Therefore divide the vector in chunks of the size of our SIMD unit plus a residual. If you process the SIMD chunks, no boundary check is required because it is done before. Only processing the residual requires boundary checks.

If you want to optimize the boundary handling later, you can write a separate kernel for the border and launch it with a different frame shape that only covers the halo/guard region.

Launching the 2D Kernel
-----------------------

The host-side launch is unchanged except that the problem extents are vectors now, and the chosen ``FrameSpec`` is
2-dimensional as well.

>   .. literalinclude:: ../../snippets/example/080_multidim.cpp

Reviewer 2: The example should show, that the ``FrameSpec`` has two dimensions.

    :language: cpp
    :start-after: BEGIN-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelLaunch
    :end-before: END-TUTORIAL-multidimKernelLaunch
    :dedent:

What Users Usually Need To Know Early
-------------------------------------

The following habits are worth learning from the start:

- Keep boundary handling explicit. It is fine to have branching for the border in the first implementation.

> - Iterate over the full valid problem range, not over guessed thread ids. Let alpaka deal with the mapping from threads to your problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The is part of the chunking page.

- Use multidimensional buffers when the algorithm is multidimensional.

> - Keep reads and writes easy to see. You make fewer mistakes when each output element is written once.

Reviewer 2: The sentence should give a hint how to keep reads and writes easy. In general you should keep your code easy as possible.
